modules/file_parser/QUICKSTART.md, before:

# File Parser - Quickstart

Parses PDF, DOCX, HTML, Markdown, images, and more into structured document blocks.

## Examples

### List Supported File Types

```bash
curl -s http://127.0.0.1:8087/file-parser/v1/info | python3 -m json.tool
```

**Output:**
```json
{
    "supported_extensions": {
        "plain_text": ["txt", "log", "md"],
        "html": ["html", "htm"],
        "pdf": ["pdf"],
        "docx": ["docx"],
        "image": ["png", "jpg", "jpeg", "webp", "gif"],
        "generic_stub": ["doc", "rtf", "odt", "xls", "xlsx", "ppt", "pptx"]
    }
}
```

### Parse a Local File

```bash
curl -s -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8087/file-parser/v1/parse-local \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"file_path": "'$PWD'/README.md"}' | python3 -m json.tool | head -40
```

### Parse a File from URL

```bash
curl -s -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8087/file-parser/v1/parse-url \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"url": "https://example.com/document.pdf"}' | python3 -m json.tool | head -40
```

### Upload and Parse a File

```bash
echo "Hello, HyperSpot!" > /tmp/test.txt
curl -s -X POST "http://127.0.0.1:8087/file-parser/v1/upload?filename=test.txt" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/octet-stream" \
  --data-binary @/tmp/test.txt | python3 -m json.tool
```

**Output:**
```json
{
    "document": {
        "id": "019bc231-fcfd-7df3-a49c-82174973ec44",
        "title": "test.txt",
        "meta": {
            "source": {"type": "uploaded", "original_name": "test.txt"},
            "content_type": "text/plain"
        },
        "blocks": [
            {
                "type": "paragraph",
                "inlines": [{"type": "text", "text": "Hello, HyperSpot!", "style": {}}]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

### Stream Parsed Content as Markdown

```bash
curl -s -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8087/file-parser/v1/parse-local/markdown \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"file_path": "'$PWD'/README.md"}'
```

Commit message:

docs: simplify quickstart guides to avoid duplication with /docs
- Restructure QUICKSTART_GUIDE.md to focus on getting started quickly
- Emphasize /docs as the authoritative, interactive API documentation
- Reduce module QUICKSTART.md files to 1-2 minimal examples each
- Add prominent links to /docs in all module quickstarts
- Update NEW_MODULE.md guideline to reflect minimal approach

Rationale:
- Avoid maintenance burden of duplicating API documentation
- /docs is auto-generated from OpenAPI spec and always current
- Interactive docs provide better UX with 'Try it out' buttons
- Quickstarts now serve as quick smoke tests, not comprehensive API docs

Addresses code review feedback about documentation becoming outdated.

Signed-off-by: Fabio Del Vigna <delvifabio@gmail.com>

modules/file_parser/QUICKSTART.md, after:

# File Parser - Quickstart

Parses PDF, DOCX, HTML, Markdown, images, and more into structured document blocks.

> **Full API Documentation:** <http://127.0.0.1:8087/docs> - Interactive docs with all endpoints, parameters, and "Try it out" buttons.

## Quick Example

### List Supported File Types

```bash
curl -s http://127.0.0.1:8087/file-parser/v1/info | python3 -m json.tool
```

**Output:**
```json
{
    "supported_extensions": {
        "plain_text": ["txt", "log", "md"],
        "html": ["html", "htm"],
        "pdf": ["pdf"],
        "docx": ["docx"],
        "image": ["png", "jpg", "jpeg", "webp", "gif"],
        "generic_stub": ["doc", "rtf", "odt", "xls", "xlsx", "ppt", "pptx"]
    }
}
```

### Upload and Parse a File

```bash
echo "Hello, HyperSpot!" > /tmp/test.txt
curl -s -X POST "http://127.0.0.1:8087/file-parser/v1/upload?filename=test.txt" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/octet-stream" \
  --data-binary @/tmp/test.txt | python3 -m json.tool
```

**Output:**
```json
{
    "document": {
        "id": "019bc231-fcfd-7df3-a49c-82174973ec44",
        "title": "test.txt",
        "meta": {
            "source": {"type": "uploaded", "original_name": "test.txt"},
            "content_type": "text/plain"
        },
        "blocks": [
            {
                "type": "paragraph",
                "inlines": [{"type": "text", "text": "Hello, HyperSpot!", "style": {}}]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

## More Examples

For additional endpoints (`parse-local`, `parse-url`, `parse-local/markdown`, etc.), see the interactive documentation at <http://127.0.0.1:8087/docs>.
